---
layout: page
title: Suit Bias Introduction
---

# Introduction to the problem of performance-enhancing suits

#### Swimmers with access to the suits had an advantage over those that did not

The causes and or reasons for the onslaught of World and Olympic records in competitive swimming are of interest to both the general public and scientific community. Many relevant questions remain unanswered. Why now? Is this an unusual occurrence and are the records really being set at an unprecedented rate? If so, how do we know this is really different from what usually occurs during any Olympic year? Could this be occurring as a matter of significantly better talent or better training techniques? How much faster can the records get? Maybe the records are a result of new coaching techniques or enhanced nutrition? Or, is the technology associated with the new swims suits assisting swimmers in a manner that prior to now did not occur? As usual, the questions are much easier to pose than is the process for finding the correct answers to them. There may, however, be evidence that exists already to help shed light on this 'record setting' observation.

One caveat to any mathematical analysis of swim performance (and subsequent predictions of swim performance) based upon prior performances, is to accept that undefined and confounding variables may introduce biases into the analysis and potentially perturb the ability of any subsequent prediction to be accurate. For example, documented use of performance enhancing pharmacological compounds during the early to mid 1970's causes an overestimation of the rate of potential improvements in subsequent years. In other words, performances subsequent to this era will appear as if something has caused a slowing of the progression rather than the "return to a normal 'unbiased' progression". As time goes by, however, additional unbiased performances will 'correct' the model allowing for earlier truly biased performances to be obvious. The causes of the temporary perturbations will, however, be speculative, at best, until reinforced by historical confirmation.

Figure 1 represents the improvement in swim speed in one representative event, the men’s 100-meter freestyle, when time is represented as speed (meters per second) as a function of ‘longitudinal’ time (years or this case Olympiads). The values provided represent the average speed of all of the records set within an Olympiad quadrennial. Thus, although the first person to swim faster than two meters per second for 100 meters did so in 1976 (Jim Montgomery, USA) the mean value for record speed during that Olympiad was somewhat less than two meters per second. The point to this is to simply demonstrate that there has been a non-linear, longitudinal progression in performance that can be illustrated such that ‘non-conforming’ data should be easily identified. As such, data can be identified as being statistically ‘inconsistent’ with the all of the preceding data (swim performances) and or subsequent data.

In this regard, modeling performances on past competition outcomes might allow insight into one current controversy in the competitive swimming.  It is reasoned that the influence of the new high-tech suits can be measured if mathematical models based upon swim performances prior to their introduction are sensitive enough to do so. Interestingly, because none of these new suits existed prior to 2000 and it is possible to document when newer versions have been introduced, the athletes and their performances can be used to test to see if these suits have introduced unnatural rates of improvement into the sport.

In this way, it should be possible to answer the question as to whether or not the new ‘equipment’ suits violate the underlying principle of fairness within the sport. Do the suits represent a bias in performance? If so, are they doing so by violating the rules of competition in that they alter buoyancy or assist performance in some other way. Identifying a bias in the outcomes of performance as gauged by testing a valid model is a necessary first step before asking how it is that the suits alter competitive performance.

The following series of blogs will be posted over the next several days: The incidence rate and prevalence of Swimming Records; an analysis of the Japanese swimmers at their trials and the 2008 Japan Open; an analysis of the performances of swimmers at the USA Swimming Olympic Trials and an analysis of the performances of swimmers at the Olympic Games. From this we hope to identify unusual performances and determine whether or not (un)specified biases have influenced the performances of the field of competitors and the Olympic Games themselves. In other words, is there evidence to suggest that there has been a recent bias introduced into swimming that has significantly altered the progression of times in an unnatural way?



The longitudinal progression of athletic records has been described by best fit curves which can be used to extrapolate future athletic performances. Any subsequent significant deviations from these curves would suggest compelling evidence of cataclysmic changes introduced into the sport. Given anecdotal reports of the performance enhancing effect of the neoprene-laden full-body swimsuits released to the competitive swimming market in 2008, we evaluated past elite swim performances to determine if the new suits biased the 2008 Olympic competition. 

Model predictions for each event at the 2008 Olympic swimming competition were compared to actual performances. The results of the 2008 swimming competition were, in general, exceptionally fast and do not fit the expectations of our mathematical modelling and based upon prior performances. With the exception of the 1996 Games (which resulted in performances that were significantly slower than expected), there is little to no evidence to suggest any pervasive performance enhancing bias existed before 2008 for men or women. Until now, our predictive modelling was largely successful in describing swim performance at the elite level. We conclude that this bias had a dominant role in enhancing performance in a manner that was inconsistent with the natural progression of swim performance observed over the last half century.

Personal communication with coaches and athletes at this level has not provided any evidence of innovation other than perhaps the introduction of new technology suits into the sport. Due to the nature of commerce and claims of "proprietary" knowledge, very little specific data exist identifying the magnitude (if any) of the effect of the newest generation suits on swim performance. While the current study does not directly measure the effect of the new technology swim suits, the athletes and their performances suggest that these suits (which did not exist prior to 2008) have introduced unnatural rates of improvement into the sport.

<div id="shiny">
	<iframe src="https://humanperformance.shinyapps.io/OlyPred" scrolling="no" style="border: none; width: 100%; height: 610px"></iframe><!--width: inherit ;height: 610px-->
</div>

